Adding the SessionEncoder (#1930)
skrub-data/skrub: doc/modules/multi_column_operations/sessionization.rst

such "bursts" of activity by a user can often help with building features that have
greater predictive power than raw individual events, such as number of sessions or
average session duration.

The |SessionEncoder| addresses this problem by detecting sessions based on
a timestamp column, other session-related columns (e.g., user and device) that should be
used to distinguish between sessions, and a ``session_gap``. Session-related columns
-- identified by the ``split_by`` parameter -- allow to split sessions based on
the provided parameters, for example to group user actions only if they were conducted
on the same device.

A session is then defined as a sequence of events that share the same value in the
``split_by`` columns, and whose events are closer to each other than the
``session_gap``.

>>> from skrub import SessionEncoder
>>> from skrub.datasets import make_retail_events
>>> events = make_retail_events(n_events=100, random_state=0)
>>> X, y = events.X, events.y

Once the necessary features are provided, the |SessionEncoder|
returns a dataframe that includes a ``timestamp_session_id`` column, which is

> composed of a monotonically increasing integer ID for each session:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
composed of a distinct integer ID for each session:
```

1  user_0164 2024-01-01 03:29:42.185048+00:00      tablet         books     search         103.4         11.00                    59
2  user_0164 2024-01-01 03:32:38.352703+00:00     desktop          home   wishlist         180.3          4.80                    59
3  user_0008 2024-01-02 10:49:56.974375+00:00      mobile         books  page_view           7.0         33.94                     2
4  user_0149 2024-01-04 10:00:15.882835+00:00     desktop   electronics  page_view         108.5          4.44                    49

With the session ID, it becomes possible to compute aggregations on
each session, for example to find the duration or number of sessions
by a user.

.. warning::

Caution! Aggregation can introduce data leakage. Records should only be aggregated from
within the training set at training time, and the test set at predict time. To
ensure this is the case, any code that performs aggregation can be wrapped in a
scikit-learn |BaseEstimator| (as shown in the
:ref:`SessionEncoder example <sphx_glr_auto_examples_0110_session_encoder.py>`),

> otherwise the pipeline should use the skrub :ref:`Data Ops framework<user_guide_data_ops_plan>`.

Reviewer: another subtlety is that if the split is time-based, it could make sense to bring in the train data when transforming test data to avoid cutting sessions that span the train/test split. don't need to discuss it here but we can keep it in mind when we rework the example

also note that there could be datasets that require sessionization but where the train/test split is not necessarily time based, if we look at sequences of full past activity and the split is by user for example

... )
>>> res = se.fit_transform(X)
>>> res.head(5) # doctest: +SKIP
     user_id                        timestamp  ... price_viewed timestamp_user
0  user_0164 2024-01-01 03:29:07.708922+00:00  ...       309.80             59
1  user_0164 2024-01-01 03:29:42.185048+00:00  ...        11.00             59
2  user_0164 2024-01-01 03:32:38.352703+00:00  ...         4.80             59
3  user_0008 2024-01-02 10:49:56.974375+00:00  ...        33.94              2
4  user_0149 2024-01-04 10:00:15.882835+00:00  ...         4.44             49

>>> se = SessionEncoder(timestamp_col="timestamp",
... split_by=["user_id", "device_type"],
... session_gap=30 * 60,
... suffix="user_device"
... )
>>> res = se.fit_transform(X)
>>> res.head(5) # doctest: +SKIP
     user_id                        timestamp  ... price_viewed timestamp_user_device
0  user_0164 2024-01-01 03:29:07.708922+00:00  ...       309.80                    75
1  user_0164 2024-01-01 03:29:42.185048+00:00  ...        11.00                    76
2  user_0164 2024-01-01 03:32:38.352703+00:00  ...         4.80                    74
3  user_0008 2024-01-02 10:49:56.974375+00:00  ...        33.94                     2

> 4  user_0149 2024-01-04 10:00:15.882835+00:00  ...         4.44                    59

Reviewer: this ends rather abruptly, maybe add a sentence to say for full details refer to the docstring?

also I wonder if don't have it the other way around, with a very long section and many examples in the docstring and a comparatively short user guide

Author: the user guide is already mostly taken from the docstring, if you think we only need a small example to tell people "this thing is here" we can do that

.. _sessionization:

.. |SessionEncoder| replace:: :class:`~skrub.SessionEncoder`
.. |BaseEstimator| replace:: :class:`~sklearn.base.BaseEstimator`
.. |TransformerMixin| replace:: :class:`~sklearn.base.TransformerMixin`

Detecting sessions in timestamped data with the SessionEncoder
----------------------------------------------------------------

When dealing with timestamped data (data that includes at least a timestamp column),

> it may be beneficial to try and identify groups of events through **sessionization**.

Reviewer: maybe link https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Session_(web_analytics) or some other resource?

Sessionization is the process of grouping a sequence of events (like user
interactions) into meaningful sessions. A session typically starts fresh or
after a period of inactivity.

> For example, in an online retail context, you might define a new session whenever

Reviewer 2: I would combine this paragraph with the above. Also, I would remove the second comma (i.e. after context).

I would also change 'a user' to 'the user' although that may be a personal style choice

more than 30 minutes pass with no activity from a user. On a website, a session may
define a sequence of requests made by a single end-user within a certain time duration.

While definitions may vary depending on the specific use case, being able to detect

> such "bursts" of activity by a user can help with building features that often have

Reviewer 2: I would put the 'often' after the 'can' (i.e. 'can often')

> greater predictive power than raw individual events.

Reviewer: such as number of sessions, average session duration, ...

> The |SessionEncoder| helps addressing this problem by detecting sessions based on

Reviewer 2: 'helps addressing' -> 'addresses'

> a timestamp column, other "session columns" (e.g., user and device) that should be

Reviewer 2: I get a little lost in this sentence. Maybe something like 'a timestamp column, other session-related columns (e.g. ...)'?

> a timestamp column, other "session columns" (e.g., user and device) that should be

Reviewer: session columns = split_by right?

used to distinguish between sessions, and a ``session_gap``. A session is then
defined as a sequence of events that share the same value in the "session columns"
and whose events are closer to each other than the ``session_gap``.

>>> from skrub import SessionEncoder
>>> from skrub.datasets import make_retail_events
>>> events = make_retail_events(n_events=100, random_state=0)
>>> X, y = events.X, events.y

Once the necessary features are provided, the |SessionEncoder|
returns a dataframe that includes a ``session_id`` column, which includes an integer,

> monotonically increasing ID, for each session:

Reviewer 2: 'which is composed of a monotonically increasing integer ID'. Also, want to note that it is a timestamp.

>>> se = SessionEncoder(timestamp_col="timestamp", split_by="user_id", session_gap=30 * 60)
>>> res = se.fit_transform(X)
>>> res.head(5) # doctest: +SKIP
     user_id                        timestamp device_type page_category event_type  time_on_page  price_viewed  timestamp_session_id
0  user_0164 2024-01-01 03:29:07.708922+00:00      mobile       fashion  page_view         134.1        309.80                    59
1  user_0164 2024-01-01 03:29:42.185048+00:00      tablet         books     search         103.4         11.00                    59
2  user_0164 2024-01-01 03:32:38.352703+00:00     desktop          home   wishlist         180.3          4.80                    59
3  user_0008 2024-01-02 10:49:56.974375+00:00      mobile         books  page_view           7.0         33.94                     2
4  user_0149 2024-01-04 10:00:15.882835+00:00     desktop   electronics  page_view         108.5          4.44                    49

> Once the session ID is available, it becomes possible to compute aggregations on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the session ID it becomes possible to compute aggregations on
```

> each session, for example to find the duration of a session, or the number of sessions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
each session, for example to find the duration or number of sessions
```

by a user.

.. warning::

> Aggregation can introduce data leakage! Records should only be aggregated from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Caution! Aggregation can introduce data leakage. Records should only be aggregated from
```

> within the training set at training time and the test set at predict time. To

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
within the training set at training time, and the test set at predict time. To
```

ensure this is the case, any code that performs aggregation can be wrapped in a
scikit-learn |BaseEstimator| (as shown in the

> :ref:`SessionEncoder example <sphx_glr_auto_examples_0110_session_encoder.py>`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:ref:`SessionEncoder example <sphx_glr_auto_examples_0110_session_encoder.py>`),
```

> or the pipeline should use the skrub :ref:`Data Ops framework<user_guide_data_ops_plan>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
otherwise the pipeline should use the skrub :ref:`Data Ops framework<user_guide_data_ops_plan>`.
```
